.TH CPCLIP 1 "2026" "cpclip" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cpclip, cpadd, cppaste, cpclear, cuclip, cuadd, cpsize \- command-line clipboard for X11 and Wayland
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cpclip
.RI [ TEXT ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR MIME ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.br
.B cpadd
.RI [ TEXT ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR MIME ]
.RB [ \-\-separator
.IR STR ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.br
.B cppaste
.RB [ \-t
.IR MIME ]
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.br
.B cpclear
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.br
.B cuclip
.RI [ TEXT ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR MIME ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.br
.B cuadd
.RI [ TEXT ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR MIME ]
.RB [ \-\-separator
.IR STR ]
.RB [ \-f ]
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.br
.B cpsize
.RB [ \-K | \-M | \-G | \-\-Ki | \-\-Mi | \-\-Gi ]
.RB [ \-t
.IR MIME ]
.RB [ \-\-backend
.IR NAME ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
One binary with six faces, selected by the name it is invoked as. It captures
process output to the system clipboard and serves the clipboard back to process
input, on both X11 and Wayland, behind one identical command interface.
.TP
.B cpclip
Read standard input (or the
.I TEXT
argument) and replace the clipboard with it.
Mirrors standard input to standard output when standard output is a terminal.
.TP
.B cpadd
Append standard input (or
.IR TEXT )
to the clipboard, joined by a separator (default newline). On an empty
clipboard this is identical to
.BR cpclip .
It refuses to overwrite a non-text selection.
Mirrors standard input to standard output when standard output is a terminal.
.TP
.B cppaste
Write the clipboard to standard output.
.TP
.B cpclear
Relinquish ownership so the clipboard becomes empty.
.TP
.B cuclip
Like
.B cpclip
but never echoes to standard output.
Useful in scripts or pipelines where terminal pass-through is unwanted.
.TP
.B cuadd
Like
.B cpadd
but never echoes to standard output.
.TP
.B cpsize
Print the byte count of the current clipboard content to standard output.
Accepts unit-scaling flags to display the result in kilobytes, megabytes, or
gigabytes (SI or IEC).
An empty clipboard prints
.BR 0 .
.PP
Because X11 and Wayland have no system-owned clipboard buffer, the copying
process itself is the storage:
.B cpclip
and
.B cpadd
fork a background process that owns the selection and serves it on demand. The
parent does not exit until that child confirms ownership. A running clipboard
manager (e.g. KDE's) typically takes over and provides persistence after the
owner exits.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-K
.RB ( cpsize
only) Print size in kilobytes (÷ 1\~000, truncated).
.TP
.BR \-M
.RB ( cpsize
only) Print size in megabytes (÷ 1\~000\~000, truncated).
.TP
.BR \-G
.RB ( cpsize
only) Print size in gigabytes (÷ 1\~000\~000\~000, truncated).
.TP
.BR \-\-Ki
.RB ( cpsize
only) Print size in kibibytes (÷ 1\~024, truncated).
.TP
.BR \-\-Mi
.RB ( cpsize
only) Print size in mebibytes (÷ 1\~048\~576, truncated).
.TP
.BR \-\-Gi
.RB ( cpsize
only) Print size in gibibytes (÷ 1\~073\~741\~824, truncated).
.TP
.BI \-t " MIME" "\fR, \fP" \-\-type " MIME"
Content type to advertise on copy or request on paste.
When
.B \-t
is omitted,
.BR cpclip " and " cuclip
sniff up to 8 KiB of the input to choose a MIME type automatically:
a NUL byte triggers
.BR application/octet-stream ;
valid UTF-8 (including pure ASCII) triggers
.BR text/plain;charset=utf-8 ;
otherwise
.B text/plain
is used.
.B cpadd
and
.B cuadd
always use
.B text/plain;charset=utf-8
by default (append is a text operation; use
.B \-t
to override).
.TP
.BR \-\-separator " " \fISTR\fP
.RB ( cpadd
only) String placed between the existing content and the appended content.
Defaults to a newline.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-no\-newline
.RB ( cppaste
only) Do not append a trailing newline. By default a single newline is appended
only when the data does not already end with one.
When
.B cppaste
retrieves binary content via the
.B application/octet-stream
fallback the trailing newline is always suppressed regardless of this flag.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-foreground
.RB ( cpclip ", " cpadd ", " cuclip ", " cuadd
only) Stay in the foreground and serve the selection until another client takes
it, instead of forking into the background.
.TP
.BR \-m ", " \-\-maxmem " " \fISIZE\fP
.RB ( cpclip ", " cpadd ", " cuclip ", " cuadd
only) Cap the input size.
.I SIZE
accepts a binary K/M/G suffix (e.g.\&
.IR 200M ).
The default is 10 MiB and 0 disables the cap. Because the owner holds the whole
payload in memory, this guards against an accidental huge input pinning RAM.
.TP
.BR \-\-backend " " \fINAME\fP
Force a backend:
.BR x11 ", " wayland ", " null ", or " auto
(the default). Auto selects Wayland when
.B $WAYLAND_DISPLAY
is set, else X11 when
.B $DISPLAY
is set.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.SH "TERMINAL PASS-THROUGH"
.B cpclip
and
.B cpadd
mirror standard input to standard output only when standard output is a
terminal, so
.RB ` "cmd | cpclip" `
shows the output and copies it, while
.RB ` "cmd | cpclip | other" `
copies silently without disturbing the pipeline.
.B cuclip
and
.B cuadd
never mirror, regardless of whether standard output is a terminal.
.SH "EXIT STATUS"
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error (no display server, unreadable selection, etc.).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (unknown invocation name or inapplicable flag).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
If set, the
.B auto
backend uses Wayland.
.TP
.B DISPLAY
If set (and Wayland is not), the
.B auto
backend uses X11.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Copy a command's output and also see it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
make 2>&1 | cpclip
.fi
.RE
.PP
Accumulate several outputs into one clipboard entry:
.PP
.RS
.nf
git rev-parse HEAD | cpclip
date              | cpadd
uname -a          | cpadd
cppaste
.fi
.RE
.PP
Paste byte-exact binary data:
.PP
.RS
.nf
cppaste -n > image.png
.fi
.RE
.PP
Copy a binary file and paste it back:
.PP
.RS
.nf
cpclip < image.png          # sniffs NUL bytes; stores as application/octet-stream
cppaste -n > image_copy.png # binary fallback; no trailing newline added
.fi
.RE
.SH NOTES
All clipboard payloads are handled as raw bytes, so NUL bytes and arbitrary
binary survive a round trip.
.PP
When
.B \-t
is not given,
.BR cpclip " and " cuclip
automatically detect the content type by inspecting up to 8 KiB of the input.
This means that text piped without
.B \-t
is advertised as
.B text/plain;charset=utf-8
to pasting applications, which may improve interoperability with rich editors.
If the detected type is wrong, override it with
.BR \-t .
.PP
Primary and secondary selections are not supported.
With a running clipboard manager,
.B cpclear
may be immediately undone by the manager restoring its history.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR wl\-clipboard (1),
.BR xclip (1),
.BR xsel (1)
